Add REX intro (#1780)
theforeman/theforeman.org: _posts/2021-02-17-introduction-to-the-remote-execution-plugin.md

---
layout: post
title: Introduction to the Remote Execution Plugin
date: 2021-02-17 17:00:00
author: Marek Hulan
tags:
- foreman
- community
- tutorial
- howto
- beginners
- openhab
- puppet
- browfield
---

In this post, we’ll see how to add a remote execution plugin to the Foreman installation 
and look at its basic functionality. We’ll create some jobs that we execute through SSH 

> on one or more of the Foreman hosts. Then we’ll look at some real-world use cases of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
on one or more Foreman hosts. Then we’ll look at some real-world use cases of
```

> useful SSH jobs automation. We’ll show how to deploy puppet agent on the Foreman host and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
useful SSH jobs automation. We’ll show how to deploy the Puppet agent on the Foreman host and
```

illustrate the use with home automation, running commands on SSH enabled routers.

<!--more-->

## Plugin installation

> To add the remote execution feature, a plugin for Foreman and Smart proxy is required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To add the remote execution feature, a plugin for Foreman and Smart Proxy is required.
```

> The installer can handle the installation and the initial configuration of both for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The installer can handle both the installation and the initial configuration.
```

> The Foreman installer can be run repeatedly. In case you haven’t done manual modifications

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Foreman installer can be run repeatedly. As long as you haven’t done manual modifications
```

to your installation, such as changing configuration files yourself, it will do no harm.
You don’t have to repeat the same parameters, their values are stored from the previous

> run, therefore you can simply just add new params. The bare minimum to install or extend

Reviewer: ```suggestion
run, therefore you can simply just add new parameters. The bare minimum to install or extend
```

existing Foreman instance with the Remote Execution, run the following:

```
foreman-installer --enable-foreman-plugin-remote-execution \
              --enable-foreman-proxy-plugin-remote-execution-ssh
```

> If you plan to use CLI, install a plugin for that, so you can use REX CLI commands by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you plan to use CLI commands, you must install a plugin for that, so you can use REX CLI commands by
```

adding `--enable-foreman-cli-remote-execution` to the command above.

## Running the first job

Once the installer finishes the run, you will see the new menu entries in the Foreman
instance. Let’s try running a job on some host. Make sure the host is running SSH daemon

> and Foreman can connect to it. Navigate to some existing host detail page and click the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and Foreman can connect to it. Navigate to an existing host detail page and click the
```

*Schedule Remote Job* button. Fill in a simple bash command to the command field,
e.g. “echo Hello world”. Click Advanced fields and specify the password for the user.

> The password will be stored only for necessary time to execute the script,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The password is stored only for the time it takes to execute the script,
```

successful if the connection was established and the job finished with exit status 0.
Otherwise it’s considered a failure and you’d see the error in the same place,
where you normally see the STDOUT.

<p float='left' align='center'>
  <img src="/static/images/blog_images/2021-02-17-introduction-to-the-remote-execution-plugin/job_invocation_2.png" width="700" />
</p>

One error you may encounter is, the host name can’t be resolved or connected to.
Make sure the host hostname can be resolved. If that is not possible or you prefer
to use its IP address for the connection, change *Setting -> Remote Execution -> Connect by IP*
to *Yes*.

## REX at scale

It is not practical to specify the SSH password for each job. Especially if you run the
job on multiple hosts and they don’t have the same password. The installer generates a
SSH key pair on the Foreman Proxy host. You can distribute the generated SSH public key
or setup your existing SSH key you already use. The default SSH key pair location is at
* ~foreman-proxy/.ssh/id_rsa_foreman_proxy
* ~foreman-proxy/.ssh/id_rsa_foreman_proxy.pub

If you replace these files with your own key, either make sure the private key is not

> protected by a passphrase or you need to specify it for every job, similarly to how we

Reviewer: ```suggestion
protected by a passphrase or you need to specify it for every job, similar to how we
```

specified the password. To distribute the generated public key, you can use the following
command

```
ssh-copy-id -i ~foreman-proxy/.ssh/id_rsa_foreman_proxy.pub root@target-machine.example.com
```

> However you can use a more elegant way and do it from Foreman directly. For that we’ll

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, you can use a more elegant way and do it from Foreman directly. For that we’ll
```

create a new job template, that will configure the SSH key on a machine on which it’s run.
Navigate to *Hosts -> Job templates* and click the *New Job Template* button.
Name it e.g. “Setup SSH key”. In the editor field, you can specify any script enriched
with ERB syntax. For example, you can write a template that renders to a bash script and
deploys the SSH public key like this:

```
#!/bin/bash
mkdir -p ~/.ssh
echo “ssh-rsa AAAAB3NzaC1yc2EAA...” > ~/.ssh/authorized_keys
```

But we can also use an existing template snippet that also takes care of the right file
permissions and deploys all public keys that Foreman is configured to use.

> To do that, use the following template content

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do that, use the following template content:
```

successfully, the job should succeed and print Hello world on STDOUT.

That was quite a lot of work to run the Hello world on multiple machines. But it
should be clear that running any job on an arbitrary set of hosts is a matter of a few
clicks. You can watch the progress of the run live, including the STDOUT for any host.
As a bonus, you can see the details of any previous run, review changes of the job
definitions in Audits page, schedule jobs to specific time or even set up recurring
execution of some job. You can limit which user can run what job on specific hosts.
Senior sysadmins can create job templates for juniors, who can run them on servers without
having direct access to them, e.g. allowing them only to restart stuck services.

## Real world use case #1 - Puppet deployment in a brownfield deployment

It’s the time for the first practical use case. In the previous
[blog post](https://theforeman.org/2021/01/updating-foreman-inventory-with-system-facts.html),
it would be handy to automate the setup of the puppet agent. Foreman already comes
with the snippet, that is normally used during the host provisioning to bootstrap the

> puppet agent. However if you start with Foreman and want to manage an existing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
puppet agent. However, if you start with Foreman and want to manage an existing
```

infrastructure, it’s useful to deploy puppet agents to all existing hosts.
Puppet agents then ask the puppet server deployed with Foreman for their configuration.
Puppet configuration management goes beyond this post, but this illustrates how
Remote Execution allows to automate this task.

> To deploy a puppet agent, we need to install the a package, create a configuration file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To deploy a puppet agent, we need to install a package, create a configuration file
```

pluginsync      = true
report          = true
ca_server       = foreman.example.com
certname        = <%= @host.fqdn %>
environment     = Production
server          = foreman.example.com
EOF

/usr/bin/puppet agent --config /etc/puppet/puppet.conf --onetime --server foreman.example.com --no-daemonize
```

The certname is set according to the host fully qualified domain name.
The `@host` variable represents the target host on which you run the job over SSH.
See the documentation of all available variables and methods at *Administer -> About -> Templates DSL*
link. It would also be good to decide on how to install the package based on the host
OS. E.g. this could do the trick

```
<% if @host.operatinsystem.family == ‘Redhat’ %>
yum -y install puppet
<% else %>
apt install puppet
<% end %>
```

Or we could reuse an existing job template, that cover many more operating systems and
is installed by default with the plugin. This is how we can install package on all
supported OSes in job templates:

```
<%= render_template("Package Action - SSH Default", :action => "install", :package => 'puppet') %>
```

In the same way, you could customize the puppet server or ca server based on what is

> assigned to the host. Before we go too far, I want to point out that thanks to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
assigned to the host. Before we continue, I want to point out that thanks to the
```

and set two possible options - ”yes” and ”no”. If you don’t set any options, the input
will be a free text form. But in this case, I wanted to limit the user input only to
enable or disable the LED blinking.

<p float='left' align='center'>
  <img src="/static/images/blog_images/2021-02-17-introduction-to-the-remote-execution-plugin/template_input.png" width="700" />
</p>

The value for user input is then available through the `input()` macro in the template.
The template example will make this clear

```
#!/bin/sh
<%- if @host.os.name == 'OpenWrt' -%>
<%-   if input('state') == 'on' -%>
<%=     "uci set system.led_wan_amber.trigger='timer'" %>
<%=     "uci set system.led_wan_amber.default=1" %>
<%=     "uci set system.led_wan_amber.delayoff=1000" %>
<%=     "uci set system.led_wan_amber.delayon=1000" %>
<%-   else -%>
<%=     "uci set system.led_wan_amber.trigger='none'" %>
<%=     "uci set system.led_wan_amber.default=0" %>
<%-   end -%>
<%=   "uci commit" %>
<%=   "/etc/init.d/led restart" %>
<%- else -%>
<%=   render_error('Unsupported OS for enabling LED') -%>
<%- end -%>
```

Based on the state input it set the desired configuration. Then it commits the OpenWrt

> configuration and restarts the led service, which is the same code for both cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
configuration and restarts the LED service, which is the same code for both cases.
```

then
  sendHttpPostRequest("https://admin:changeme@foreman.example.com/api/job_invocations", "application/json", '{"location_id": 2,
 "organization_id": 1,
 "job_invocation": {
   "job_template_id": 142,
   "targeting_type": "static_query",
   "inputs": {
     "state": "on"
   },
   "search_query": "hostgroup = Routers"
 }}')
end
```

Of course I changed the URL and user credentials, in real world, I recommend using
a strong password or even better, creating a personal access token for the non-admin
user, who has permissions limited just to run this specific job.
The search query specifies the targets, in my case it’s all hosts assigned to the
Routers host group. The job template id is the id of the template I created.
Similarly there’s a rule for disarming, just changing the state input value to off.
The same flow of course is not limited to the openHAB, you can very easily convert
this to curl command or fire the similar request form any other (home) automation tool.

## Summary

I hope you found this Remote Execution introduction useful and I’ll be happy if
you share your experience and thoughts in the discussion below. I plan to incorporate

> REX in next posts too. The user interface for triggering the job is now being greatly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
REX in the next posts too. The user interface for triggering the job is now being greatly
```
